---
title: FF2016 Talk Slides
modified:
categories: talks
excerpt: "My talk slides/movies from the FF2016 conference at Northwestern"
tags: [black holes, Chern-Simons, beyond-GR]
date: 2016-09-03T00:00:00-00:00
---

Over the past three days, [CIERA](http://ciera.northwestern.edu/)
hosted the
[Fellows at the Frontier 2016](http://sites.northwestern.edu/ff2016/)
conference, aka FF2016 or
[#FF16CIERA](https://twitter.com/hashtag/FF16CIERA). This conference
was really broad in scope, and all the speakers gave really excellent
talks. 

Here are [my slides]({{ site.url }}/files/BBH-mergers-beyond-gr.pdf) and
a movies (right click and save
[[1]]({{ site.url }}/files/zooming.m4v)
[[2]]({{ site.url }}/files/theta3d.mp4))
from FF2016. This talk was reporting on progress in simulating binary
black hole mergers in theories beyond general relativity.
Enjoy!

**Title**: Black hole mergers: beyond general relativity

**Abstract**: One hundred years after the birth of general relativity,
 advanced LIGO has finally directly detected gravitational waves. The
 source: two black holes merging into one. Advanced LIGO will soon
 provide the opportunity to test GR, using gravitational waves, in the
 dynamical strong-field regime—a setting where GR has not yet been
 tested. GR has passed all weak-field tests with flying colors. Yet it
 should eventually break down, so we must look to the strong-field. To
 perform strong-field tests of GR, we need waveform models from
 theories *beyond* GR. To date there are no numerical simulations of
 black hole mergers in theories which differ from GR. The main
 obstacle is the mathematical one of “well-posedness.” I will explain
 how to overcome this obstacle, and demonstrate the success of this
 approach by presenting the first numerical simulations of black hole
 mergers in a theory beyond GR.

<video controls style="height:360px;" >
  <source src="{{ site.url }}/files/zooming.webm" type="video/webm">
  <source src="{{ site.url }}/files/zooming.m4v" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the <code>video</code> element.
</video>

<video controls style="height:360px;" >
  <source src="{{ site.url }}/files/theta3d.webm" type="video/webm">
  <source src="{{ site.url }}/files/theta3d.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the <code>video</code> element.
</video>

The conference also had the highest fraction of active tweeps of any
astro/physics conference I've attended. You can find a list of the
[FF2016 tweeps here](https://twitter.com/duetosymmetry/lists/ff16ciera/members),
and see
[what they tweeted about during the conference here](https://twitter.com/hashtag/FF16CIERA).
