---
layout: post
title: "GR: 03 - Tensor Calculus"
modified:
categories:
excerpt: "Tensor Calculus"
tags: [GR]
image:
feature:
date: 2016-09-04T00:00:00-08:00

---
We want the laws of physics to be invariant - true for all observers. This is why tensors are so important - a tensor equation is true in all coordinate systems.

### 3.1 The Covariant Derivative

Derivatives in curved space are not as simple as in the Cartesian case. This is because the basis vectors themselves vary from point to point. <br> <br> e.g. take a vector $$ \vec{A}$$ and differentiate it:

$$ \partial_a \vec{A} = \partial_a (A^b \vec{e}_b) = (\partial_a A^b) \vec{e}_b + A^b (\partial_a \vec{e}_b)$$

In the Cartesian case we can simple toss the second term, but this is not true generally (e.g. consider the case in spherical polars). <br> <br> In general, the derivative of the basis vectors is given by,

$$ \boxed {\partial_b e_a = \Gamma_{ab}^c e_c}$$

where $$ \Gamma$$ are the **Christoffel symbols** - think of these as correction terms to account for the basis changing. <br> <br> The derivative of a vector can then be written as,

$$
\begin{align}
\partial_a \vec{A} &= (\partial_a A^b) e_b + \Gamma_{ca}^b A^c e_b \\
                   &= (\partial_a A^b + \Gamma_{ca}^b A^c) e_b \\
                   &= \nabla_b A^a e_b
\end{align}
$$

The $$ \nabla$$ term defines the covariant derivative of a vector:

$$ \boxed {\nabla_b A^a = \partial_b A^a + \Gamma^b_{ca} A^c}$$

and similarly for a one-form:

$$ \boxed{\nabla_b \sigma_a = \partial_b \sigma_a - \Gamma^b_{ca} \sigma_c}$$

From these two expressions, we can define the covariant derivative of an arbitrary tensor:

$$
\begin{align}
\nabla_c T^a_b &= \nabla_c (A^a B_b) \\
               &=(\partial_c A^a + \gamma^c_{ad}A^d)B_b + A^a(\partial_c B_b - \Gamma_{bc}^d B_d)  \\
               &= \partial_c T^a_b + \Gamma_{ad}^c T^d_b - \Gamma_{bc}^d T^a_d
\end{align}
$$

A nice quick general rule is: **take the partial derivative of the tensor, then add a $$ \Gamma^c_{ab}$$ term for each contravariant index and subtract a $$\Gamma^c_{ab}$$ for each covariant index**

### 3.2 The Torsion Tensor
The Torsion tensor is defined,

$$ T^a_{bc} = \Gamma_{bc}^a - \Gamma_{cb}^a = 2 \Gamma^a_{[bc]}$$

In GR, the torsion tensor is taken to vanish, and so the Christoffel connection is symmetric. There do exist theories of gravity, such as [Einsten-Cartan theories](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstein–Cartan_theory) in which the torsion tensor does not vanish.

### 3.3 Christoffel Symbols and the Metric

The Christoffel symbols [can be shown](http://tomkimpson.com/GR3.1-ChristoffelDeriv/) to be related to the metric via,

$$ \Gamma_{ca}^f = \frac{1}{2} g^{fb} (\partial_c g_{ab} + \partial_a g_{bc} - \partial_d g_{ca})$$

### 3.4 The Exterior Derivative
An extension to the one-forms $$ (0,1)$$ we have been discussing are p-forms $$ (0,p)$$. <br> <br> We can construct higher order forms by using the wedge product, i.e. we can construct a two-from, from two one forms as

$$ \alpha \wedge \beta = \alpha \otimes \beta - \beta \otimes \alpha$$


One use of the wedge product is in calculating the **exterior derivative**. <br> <br> The exterior derivative extends the concept of the differential of a function to higher degree differential forms. <br> <br> The exterior derivative is denoted by the symbol $$ d$$ and maps a $$ p$$ form into a $$ p+1$$ form. <br> <br>
Exterior derivative of :

* 0-form: This is just an ordinary function, $$ df = \frac{\partial f}{\partial x^a} d x^a$$

* 1-form: Considering a one form as a function multiplied by a differential, then

$$ d(f_a dx^a) = df_a \wedge dx^a$$

* General p-form $$ \alpha$$ and q-form
$$ \beta$$, $$ d(\alpha \wedge \beta) = d \alpha \wedge \beta + (-1)^p \alpha \wedge d \beta $$

Some nice properties of the exterior derivative are,

* $$ d^2 =0$$ such that $$ d(d \alpha) =0$$

* Closed form $$ \alpha$$ have $$ d \alpha =0$$.

* Exact form $$ \alpha = d \beta$$ where $$ \alpha$$ is a $$p$$ form and $$ \beta$$ a $$p+1$$ form.


### 3.4 The Lie Derivative

The Lie Derivative is defined,

$$ L_V W = V^b \nabla_b W^a - W^b \nabla_b V^a$$

### 3.5 Geodesics and the absolute derivative

For a curve parameterized by $$ \lambda$$, the absolute derivative of vector $$ V$$, is

$$ \frac{D V^a}{D \lambda} = \frac{d V^a}{d \lambda} + \Gamma_{bc}^a u^b V^c$$

where $$ u^b$$ is a tangent to the curve. The absolute derivative is important as it allows us to find **geodesics** <br> <br> A geodesic can be thought of as the shortest distance between two points. If a curve is a geodesic, then the tangent vector $$ u$$ satisfies,

$$ \frac{D u^a}{D \lambda} = \alpha u^a$$

where $$ \alpha$$ is a scalar function of $$ \lambda$$. Since $$ u^a = \frac{dx^a}{d \lambda}$$ then,

$$ \frac{d^2 x^a}{d \lambda^2} + \Gamma_{bc}^a \frac{d x^b}{d \lambda} \frac{dx^c}{d \lambda} = \alpha \frac{dx^a}{d \lambda}$$

The curve can be re-parameterized in such a way that $$ \alpha=0$$. The parameter for which this is the case is known as the **affine parameter**. Therefore for affine parameter $$ s$$,

$$ \frac{d^2 x^a}{d s^2} + \Gamma_{bc}^a \frac{d x^b}{d s} \frac{dx^c}{d s} = 0$$

Geometrically this means that the vector $$ u$$ is parallel transported along a curve.

### 3.6 The Riemann, Ricci and Einstein tensors

The Riemann tensor is given by,

$$ R^a_{bcd} = \partial_c \Gamma^a_{bd} - \partial_d \Gamma^a_{bc} +\Gamma^e_{bd}\Gamma^a_{ec}-\Gamma^e_{bc}\Gamma^a_{ed} $$

We can lower the first index with the metric,

$$ R_{abcd} = g_{ae} R^e_{bcd}$$

Symmetries:
$$ R_{abcd} =R_{cdab}=-R_{abdc}=-R_{bacd} $$

$$ R_{abcd}+R_{acdb}+R_{adbc}=0$$

Computation of these quantities is long and tedious - in the next section we will discuss the use of a non-coordinate basis for making everything easier. <br> <br> The **Ricci tensor** is the contraction of the Riemann tensor,

$$ R_{ab} = R^c_{acb}$$

This too is symmetric. <br> <br> The **Ricci scalar** is then,

$$ R = g^{ab} R_{ab} = R^a_a$$

The **Einstein tensor** is,

$$ G_{ab} = R_{ab} - \frac{1}{2} R g_{ab}$$

### 3.7 The Weyl Tensor

The Weyl tensor is given by,

$$ C_{abcd} = R_{abcd} = \frac{1}{2}(g_{ad}R_{cb}+g_{bc}R_{da}-g_{ac}R_{db}-g_{bd}R_{ca}) + \frac{1}{6} (g_{ac} g_{db} - g_{ad}g_{cb})R$$

It is also known as the **conformal tensor**. <br> <br> Two metrics are conformally related if,

$$ \bar{g}_{ab} = \omega^2 (x) g_{ab}$$

 for some differentiable function $$ \omega(x)$$ <br> <br> A metric is conformally flat if there exists a function $$ \omega (x)$$ which relates the metric conformally to the Minkowskian,

 $$ g_{ab} = \omega^2 (x) \eta_{ab}$$

 A nice property of the Weyl tensor is that $$ C^a_{bcd}$$ is the same for an initial metric and any metric conformally related to this initial metric.
