---
layout: post
title: "GR: 02 - Vectors, Tensors and the Metric"
modified:
categories:
excerpt: "Vectors, Tensors, The Metric"
tags: [GR]
image:
feature:
date: 2016-09-02T00:00:00-08:00

---

### 2.1 Vectors

We can write a vector with components $$ x^i$$ and basis $$ e_i$$ using **Einstein Summation notation** as

$$ \vec{r} = x^1 \vec{e}_1 + x^2 \vec{e}_2 + x^3 \vec{e}_3 = \Sigma_i x^i \vec{e}_i = x^i \vec{e}_i $$

In a coordinate system, basis vectors are tangent to the coordinate lines such that,

$$ \vec{e_a} = \partial_a = \frac{\partial}{\partial x^a}$$

A tensor of type $$ (0,N) $$ is a function which takes $$ N $$ vectors and outputs a real number. If $$ N=1$$, the tensor is a **one form** or **covariant vector** i.e. a one-form is a linear scalar function of a vector.

$$ \tilde V = V_a \omega^a ; \omega^a e_b = \delta_b^a$$

We can transform from one frame to another (in the covariant case) as,

$$ A_{b'} = \Lambda^a_{b'} A_a $$

where,


$$\Lambda^a_{b'} = \frac{\partial x^a}{\partial x^{b'}}$$

### 2.2 The Metric

Fundamentally, geometry can be described by Pythagoras. An interval in 4D spacetime is written as,

$$ ds^2 = g_{ab} dx^a dx^b$$

The **metric** $$ g_{ab}$$ is a second rank, symmetric tensor. Note that some authors use the term **signature** to refer to the **trace** of the metric matrix. <br> <br> The metric inverse is defined by,

$$ g_{ab} g^{bc} = \delta_a^c$$

It can be used for raising/lowering indices as,

$$ V_a = g_{ab} V^b$$

The dot product of two vectors is then,

$$ V \cdot W =V_a W^a = g_{ab} V^b W^a$$

The null vector $$ V^a$$ satisfies,

$$ g_{ab} V^a V^b = 0$$

The flat metric of Minkowski spacetime, the **Minkowskian** is

$$ \eta_{ab} = diag(-1,1,1,1) $$


### 2.3 Manifolds and Parameterized Curves

A **manifold** can simply be thought of as a continuous space of points. Globally it can have any geometry, but locally it looks flat. A **differentiable manifold** has the property that it is both continuous and differentiable. <br> <br>

**Parameterized Curves:** a point that moves through space traces out a curve. This curve can be parameterized e.g.

$$ x^a = x^a(\lambda)$$

The curve is described by a set of $$ n$$ parametric equations, for $$ n$$ dimensions. <br> <br>

Let $$ x^a(\lambda)$$ be a parameterized curve. We can expand the differential vector in terms of a set of basis vectors:

$$ \frac{d}{d \lambda} = \frac{d x^a}{d \lambda} \cdot \frac{\partial}{\partial x^a}$$

### 2.4 Notation and Definitions

Authors often use a bracket notation, in the form $$ <one form, vector>$$. In this case, the dot product can be written as,

$$ p \cdot v = <\tilde p, \vec{v}> = p_a v^a$$.

**Symmetric tensor**:

$$ B_{ab} = B_{ba} \, \, ; \, \, T_{(ab)} = \frac{1}{2}(T_{ab}+T_{ba})$$

**Anti-Symmetric tensor**:

$$ B_{ab} = -B_{ba} \, \, ; \, \, T_{[ab]} = \frac{1}{2}(T_{ab}-T_{ba})$$

[**Levi-Cevita** tensor:](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levi-Civita_symbol#Three_dimensions)

$$ \epsilon_{abcd}=
\begin{cases}
+1,  & \text{if $n$ is even} \\[2ex]
-1, & \text{if $n$ is odd} \\
0, & \text{else}
\end{cases}$$
