Title: The Gauge principle and the Higgs Mechanism
Date: 2016-01-23
Summary: Notes


*This year for my Theoretical Physics module we have a so called 'conceptual test'. This involves writing an essay under exam conditions on a pre-decided topic. This year the topic is 'The Gauge principle and the Higgs Mechanism'. This page will hold my notes on that topic.*

###What is the gauge principle?

In field theory, different configurations of unobservable fields/potentals can result in identical observable quantites/fields. i.e. the actual physics does not change. We might also say that such a transformations leaves the Lagrangian invariant - i.e. the same physics (via the Euler-Lagrange equations) results. A transformation from one such field to another is known as a *gauge transformation* whilst the lack of change in the observable after a gauge transformation is known as *gauge symmetery*.

The earliest use of the gauge principle came with Maxwell and electrodynamics, where the electric potential $\phi$ and the magnetic (vector) potential $\mathbf{A}$ can be transformed as,


$$ \mathbf{A}' \rightarrow \mathbf{A} + \nabla f ; \phi \rightarrow \frac{\partial f}{\partial t}$$

for a function $f(x,t)$. Since $f(x,t)$ varies in both space and time, this is described as a *local* transformation.


###What is spontaneous symmetry breaking?
Spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) referes to the fact that although the physical laws which govern the behaviour of a system may be symmeteric in some way, the eventual behavious of the system will ultimately not be symmeteric. 

A classical example is a pencil balancing on its tip. The system is symmeteric about the pencil axis and the laws that govern the system are also symmeteric. Despite tehis the pencil will fall *in some specific direction*. In doing so the symmetery is broken.

For our topic related to particle physics, SSB refers to the situation whereby a potential has a local maximum that lies on an axis of symmetery, e.g. the famous 'mexican hat potential'. A particle 'at' the local maximum is fundamentally unstable, though symmeteric. It ultimately collapses to the lower energy state, breaking the symmetery.

We might condense this answer down to: 'SSB is a spontanteous process whereby a system in a symmeterical state ends up in an asymmeterical state.'

SSB allows one to introduce bosons into quantum field theories

good explanation [here](https://www.nikhef.nl/~ivov/HiggsLectureNote.pdf) chapter 1.3

###What is the problem to be solved?
Electroweak theory is the unification of hte electromagnetic and the weak nuclear forces. The electromagnetic forces has the photon as its associated quanta, whislt the weak forces involves the $W^{\pm}$ and $Z^0$ bosons. These weak bosons are very short ranged and so they must be massive, whereas the photon is massless. We therefore want a theory that contains both massive and massless force carriers.

However, EW theory has some shortcomings:

    -

###What is the mass problem?
Explain formulation of EW theory.



###How does the Higgs resolve this?


###IS SSB really involved in the Higgs?